is your cable television on the fritz? one explanation, scientists suspect, may be the weather the weather in space, that is. mit researchers are investigating the effects of space weather such as solar flares, geomagnetic storms and other forms of electromagnetic radiation on geostationary satellites, which provide much of the worlds access to cable television, internet services and global communications. geostationary satellites orbit at the same rate as the earths rotation, essentially remaining above the same location throughout their lifetimes. these satellites are designed to last up to years, during which time they may be bombarded by charged particles. most satellites cover sensitive electronics with layers of protective shielding, but over time, radiation can penetrate and degrade a satellites components and performance. if we can understand how the environment affects these satellites, and we can design to improve the satellites to be more tolerant, then it would be very beneficial not just in cost, but also in efficiency, says whitney lohmeyer, a graduate student in mits department of aeronautics and astronautics. lohmeyer is working with kerri cahoy, an assistant professor of aeronautics and astronautics, to understand how sensitive components are to the weather conditions in space, and how space weather may contribute to failures. in a paper published in the journal space weather, the team analyzed space weather conditions at the time of failures in eight geostationary satellites over years of operation. the researchers found that most of the failures occurred at times of high-energy electron activity during declining phases of the solar cycle. this particle flux, the scientists theorize, may have accumulated in the satellites over time, creating internal charging that damaged their amplifiers key components responsible for strengthening and relaying a signal back to earth. lohmeyer says a better understanding of space weathers effects on satellites is needed not just for current fleets, but also for the next generation of communications satellites. users are starting to demand more capabilities, lohmeyer notes. they want to start video-streaming data, they want to communicate faster with higher data rates. so design is changing along with susceptibilities to space weather and radiation that didnt used to exist, but are now becoming a problem.space-weather disconnecttoday, engineers design satellites with space weather in mind, using radiation models to predict how much radiation a satellite may be exposed to over its lifetime. cahoy notes that a satellites radiation exposure may vary depending on its orbit. for instance, some orbits are more dangerous than others; engineers choose components that can survive and operate in such environments. but space weather is a lot more dynamic than models predict, and there are many different ways that charged particles can wreak havoc on your satellites electronics, cahoy adds. the hard part about satellites is that when something goes wrong, you dont get it back to do analysis and figure out what happened.to add another layer of complication, lohmeyer points out a disconnect between satellite engineers and space-weather forecasters.the space-weather community provides forecasting mechanisms for companies to help them better operate their satellites, and they may say, space-weather activity is incredibly high right now, were putting out a warning, lohmeyer says. but engineers and operators dont really understand what this implies.lohmeyers primary goal, she says, is to bridge the gap between the space-weather community and satellite engineers.reading the space forecastto establish a better understanding of space weathers effects on satellite equipment, cahoy and lohmeyer partnered with inmarsat, a telecommunications company based in london. the researchers analyzed more than , operational hours of telemetry data from eight of the companys satellites, including temperature and electric-current measurements from the satellites solid-state amplifiers. from these data, the researchers analyzed scientific space-weather data coinciding with anomalies from to , the majority of which were considered hard failures unrecoverable failures that may lead to a temporary shutdown of the spacecraft. the team noted the dates and times of each failure, and then analyzed the weather conditions leading up to each failure, using observations from multiple space-weather satellites. such observations included solar-flare activity and geomagnetic storms.specifically, the researchers analyzed the kp index, a measurement of geomagnetic activity that is represented along a scale from zero to nine. satellite engineers incorporate the kp index into radiation models to anticipate space conditions for a particular spacecrafts orbit. however, as the team found, most of the amplifier failures occurred during times of low geomagnetic activity, with a kp index of three or less a measurement that engineers would normally consider safe. the finding suggests that the kp index may not be the most reliable metric for radiation exposure.instead, cahoy and lohmeyer discovered that many amplifiers broke down during times of high-energy electron activity, a phenomenon that occurs during the solar cycle, in which the suns activity fluctuates over an -year period. the flux of high-energy electrons is highest during the declining phase of the solar cycle a period during which most amplifier failures occurred. lohmeyer says that over time, such high-energy electron activity may penetrate and accumulate inside a satellite, causing internal charging that damages amplifiers and other electronics. while most satellites carry back-up amplifiers, she notes that over an extended mission, these amplifiers may also fail. once you get into a -year mission, you may run out of redundant amplifiers, lohmeyer says. if a company has invested over million in a satellite, they need to be able to assure that it works for that period of time. we really need to improve our method of quantifying and understanding the space environment, so we can better improve design.daniel baker, a professor of astrophysical and planetary sciences at the university of colorado who was not involved in the research, says that in designing satellites for space, engineers try to strike a reasonable balance between adequate design against space environmental factors and overdesign that can be immensely expensive and counterproductive.the reality, he adds, is that there may always be some operational problems because space is a harsh place.that said, the mit teams findings will help engineers design more robust satellite systems and components to the betterment of us all who depend on space systems, baker says.this research was supported by inmarsat and by the national science foundation. graphic demonstrating some possible effects of intense solar activity credits: nasas goddard space flight centermary pat hrybyk-keith open the weather app on your phone or glance at the news and you can quickly find a detailed forecast for the weather in your location. the report is likely to affect your behavior for the day: if you put on sandals or snow boots, if you exercise indoors or jog around the block, if you walk to work or take the bus. similarly, space is full of dynamic weather patterns that can have real effects for life on earth. space weather refers to conditions in the solar system produced by the suns activity. just as weather is always occurring on earth, space weather is ongoing. even without major solar activity, satellites and communications systems can be impacted by variability in the density and composition of the near-earth environment. space isnt empty like we often think, said alexa halford, space physics researcher at nasas goddard space flight center in greenbelt, maryland. the study of space weather is really just trying to understand the space environment around us, like we try to understand terrestrial weather. at its most extreme, space weather can disrupt radio communications and endanger astronauts. in the past, activity on the sun has even temporarily caused large electrical blackouts. but with forecasting and proper preparation, these disruptive effects can be largely avoided. thats why nasa studies space weather conditions. ) what kind of weather events occur in space, and when are they likely to strike? quite different from your average terrestrial rain or snow, space weather in our solar system is composed of radiation and particles from the sun. the sun is made up of superhot electrically charged plasma, the fourth state of matter. plasma constantly streams toward the planets as solar wind, pouring energy into near-earth space. thats not all the sun is capable of. sometimes, it hosts much more dramatic events. solar flares are tremendous explosions on the surface of the sun, releasing energy which travels at the speed of light. their effects on earth are apparent in eight minutes. coronal mass ejections (cmes) are eruptions of large clouds of solar plasma and magnetic fields from the sun. the geomagnetic storms resulting from these events may occur one or several days later. cmes and solar flares can also occur at the same time. coronal mass ejections and solar flares credits: nasas goddard space flight centermary pat hrybyk-keith the sun operates in an eleven-year solar cycle, and cmes and flares are more common during the middle part of the solar cycle, called solar maximum. during solar maximum, the sun may produce several cmes per day and a few truly massive explosions per year, said antti pulkkinen, director of the heliophysics science division at nasa goddard. in comparison, during solar minimum, the sun may be relatively quiet for extended periods of time. in solar cycle , the sun is expected to hit solar maximum around . ) sowhy doesnt space weather just torch us? earth has a strong, large magnetic field produced by charged molten iron churning in its core. that field keeps away most of the charged solar wind streaming toward earth, just like an umbrella works in a rainstorm. the area within the safety of earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere. an illustration of the sun interacting with earths magnetosphere credits: nasas goddard space flight centermary pat hrybyk-keith earths magnetosphere is quite large and strong. on the side away from the sun, it extends hundreds of times the length of earths roughly , mile-radius. the magnetosphere faces much more pressure on the side facing the sun, where it extends to times earths radius (between around , miles to , miles). the magnetosphere is this really nice protective shield, halford said. it blocks out most of the radiation and bad weather that you get in space, but not all of it. another barrier is earths thick atmosphere, which blocks harmful light radiation from the sun from reaching earths surface. ) what are the effects of space weather on earth? as halford explains, the protection offered by the magnetosphere isnt perfect. there are three main ways that an explosion on the suns surface can affect earth. radio blackout storm: this type of storm, generated by electromagnetic energy light, mostly in wavelengths that are invisible to human eyes is most likely to occur following a solar flare. it takes light only eight minutes to reach earth from the sun, so the effects from this type of event are almost immediate. electromagnetic energy released in flares disrupts earths upper atmosphere the region where communication signals travel and can cause signal blackouts. one risk of a radio blackout is that radios are often used for emergency communications, for instance, to direct people amid an earthquake or hurricane. imagine that a solar storm happens to coincide with a natural disaster, when radio communications are essential for keeping people safe. this happened during the september hurricane irma. if operators are notified quickly, halford says, they can change radio frequencies and avoid an outage. solar radiation storm: a solar radiation storm emits a sea of very small, fast-moving charged particles. at their accelerated speed, these particles carry lots of energy and can permeate the magnetosphere and endanger astronauts and spacecraft in earths orbit. to avoid the radiation impact, sensitive systems in satellites may be powered off and astronauts may be instructed to build shelter, or move to better shielded sections within their spacecraft. halford likens it to hiding in a basement during a tornado. geomagnetic storm: within one to three days of a solar eruption, giant clouds of plasma, cmes, may reach earths orbit, compressing the magnetosphere. the influx of charged particles and electromagnetic fields rippling through earths magnetosphere can induce currents in many important electrical systems on earths surface, including power grids. major blackouts from geomagnetic storms occurred in and . halford and pulkkinen said in many countries including the united states, there are safeguards in place to decrease the likelihood of this happening again. ) how do scientists monitor space weather? a variety of agencies keep close watch on space weather. noaas space weather prediction center is the u.s. governments official source for space weather forecasts. nasa heliophysics coordinates research efforts with noaa, the national science foundation, the u.s. geological survey, and the u.s. air force research laboratory on the national space weather strategy and action plan. nasa heliophysics also maintains a fleet of scientific observatories to observe solar eruptions and earth-directed space weather. ) can individuals prepare for space weather events? auroras shimmer over ny-lesund, svalbard. a green lidar beam shoots into the sky in the foreground. credits: nasajoy ng scientists and federal government organizations monitor and prepare for space weather events. engineers work to build rad-hard, or radiation resistant, satellites. astronauts may need to take shelter during certain space weather events. power grid operators may implement safeguards against geomagnetic storm effects. the united states government maintains a webpage with information about what to do if space weather causes a power outage or other damage. however, for most individuals, halford says theres only one thing they may wish to do in the event of a space weather event: prepare for the aurora. those near the poles may get to see beautiful displays of light in the sky as the loss of particles from the magnetosphere during a geomagnetic storm excites particles in earths atmosphere. traveling to a location with a good view may require a flight, a hotel reservation, a hot chocolate, and a warm blanket. by alison goldnasas goddard space flight center, greenbelt, md. this week solar flares sent a huge blast of x-rays and charged particles screaming towards the earth. solar astronomer david hathaway and physicist doug biesecker discuss the sun's explosive behavior, and how that 'space weather' affects satellites, airplanes and the electric grid. sponsor message related npr stories space newly fallen meteorites offer fresh look at mars space kepler telescope spots tiniest exoplanets yet space spacex craft to head to space stationira flatow, host: you've probably heard the news earlier this week. there was an explosion on the surface of the sun, a solar flare, and because we at science friday want to know how everything works and why, we're calling in a couple of experts to explain the abcs of a solar storm and actually how the sun works.how good are we at predicting these solar explosions? what effects can they have on the earth? are there still some unsolved mysteries about the sun and how it works? let me introduce my guests. david hathaway is a solar astronomer at nasa's marshall space flight center in huntsville, alabama. welcome back to science friday, dr. hathaway.david h. hathaway: thank you, ira.flatow: you're welcome. doug biesecker is a physicist at noaa's space weather prediction center in boulder. he joins us from radio station kgnu in boulder. welcome to science friday, dr. biesecker.doug biesecker: thanks for having me on the show, ira.flatow: you're welcome. david, can you give us a play-by-play of what happened there on the sun this week?hathaway: yeah, it starts with a flash, a solar flare that we see particularly in x-rays from the sun. the sun gets to , times brighter than normal in x-rays from the sunspot region. with that - we saw that, of course, in the time it takes light to get from the sun, so eight and a half minutes or so.within an hour we saw radiation from it. this is energetic, subatomic particles, electrons and protons and so forth, and that built up pretty steadily and stayed high for days. that whole explosion, it's a magnetic explosion on the sun, launched what we called a coronal mass ejection.this is literally a billion tons of matter moving at a million miles an hour, streaming through the solar system, and it was aimed pretty much right at us. that hit us a couple days later and produced some spectacular auroral arrays.flatow: and is it going on still? is there still activity going on?hathaway: well, it's interesting you should ask. that one has since calmed down, but we are at this moment in the midst of an even bigger flare as far as x-rays, but it's off the edge of the sun, so we're not going to get the dramatic fireworks here on earth from it. but we are at this moment in the midst of an x-ray flare that's even more powerful than the one from a few days ago.flatow: wow.biesecker: ira, in addition to that, i just want to point out that the radiation storm is - from that is also in progress.flatow: so we called you at the right time.hathaway: indeed.flatow: all right, we're going to - we have a whole bunch of time to talk about it. so --- is our number. we're going to talk about this new solar flare that's happening as we speak and bigger than the one that happened earlier this week. you can tweet us scifri, -s-c-i-f-r-i, and you can also go to our facebook page and our website.so we'll be back talking more about solar flares with david hathaway and doug biesecker. our number again, ---. we're in the middle of a big one, and we'll talk about it some more. stay with us.(soundbite of music)flatow: you're listening to science friday. i'm ira flatow. we're talking about solar astronomy this hour with david hathaway of nasa's marshall space flight center, doug biesecker at noaa's space weather prediction center. our number, ---, and we called them up originally to talk about this week's earlier solar flare.but we find out right now, as we speak, there's an even bigger one happening, although not the one that's pointed at us. it's not going to be hitting the earth. is that correct, doug?biesecker: right, so the active region, these regions of intense magnetic field that produce flares and give us the coronal mass ejections, the same region that gave us the activity earlier in the week has rotated in the five-day sense to where it's now seen at the edge of the sun.and so the coronal mass ejection associated with this big flare is headed off away from earth. but even in spite of that, we see the direct x-rays and ultraviolet from the flare, and any radiation being accelerated by the coronal mass ejection can still make its way to earth, and we're seeing both of those effects in progress.flatow: and what effect would it have on earth here?hathaway: well, the flare, the main effect is an atmospheric one. and the way you might be concerned about that well, really, you probably wouldn't be - but if you're somebody who uses high-frequency radio to communicate say, a ham operator, or you're in a ship at sea, or you're even in a plane flying, you know, across the pacific ocean right now, you'd find your high-frequency radio probably isn't working because of this solar flare.the way that works is the signal has to bounce off a layer in the atmosphere known as the ionosphere, and right now the ionosphere is very different from its normal state. and that bounce of the radio signal doesn't happen; it in fact gets absorbed by the atmosphere.biesecker: so hf users - high-frequency users in the pacific right now are feeling the effects of this solar flare.flatow: were they warned about this one?biesecker: well, predicting a solar flare would have happened today at : eastern time. we're not there yet. what we do is we look at these regions of intense magnetic field, the sun spots, how many of them are there, how complex is the magnetic field contained within, how big is it.and from that we can compute our probability. so much like you might hear percent chance of rain tomorrow, we can also say, you know, percent chance of solar flares tomorrow.flatow: so people in that area that you're saying, pilots, whatever, who are flying, they may be having trouble and not knowing why but probably predicting, uh-oh, another solar flare.biesecker: that's exactly right. but they have a workaround. as long as they can see those communication satellites that sit over the equator in geostationary orbit, , miles above the surface of the earth, they can switch to that sat-com and still get the signal through.flatow: david hathaway, what is it on the sun that causes this thing to happen? what's going on in the internal workings of the sun?hathaway: it's magnetism, pure and simple, that - it's magnetic fields involved in all of this. it's magnetic fields that make the sunspots themselves, that within the sun the flow of these ionized, electrically charged gases produces intense magnetic fields, and in some spots it gets to be, you know, thousands of times stronger than the earth's own magnetic field, strong enough that in fact it chokes off the flow of heat from inside the sun, which is why sunspots appear dark.but those magnetic fields can get twisted out of shape and basically short-circuit by reconnecting, and all that magnetic energy gets released explosively. and so that's where it ultimately comes from, is magnetism ultimately produced inside the sun that we see manifest at the surface in sunspots and above the surface in coronal features, these loops where the gases in the sun's hot corona are confined, move along these magnetic loops above the surface.and so we can see the presence of the magnetic fields there. but it's - again, magnetism's the key to it all.flatow: speaking of magnetism, does our earth's magnetic field that surrounds it, does it protect us from any of these things?hathaway: very much so, yeah, that the earth's own magnetic field would normally look like a bar magnet's magnetic field, what we call a dipole field, going into the north, coming out of the south. but because it's also subjected to the solar wind that blows off of the sun at a million miles an hour, that solar wind drapes the earth's magnetic field into a comet-like structure, a tail.so it pushes the magnetic field on the day side closer to the earth, and it stretches it out on the night side into a long tail in back of the earth. so that magnetic field does protect us from charged particles, but it's - it can also get disrupted by the magnetic fields in these coronal mass ejections that when this magnetic explosion goes off, the coronal mass ejection that's produced has magnetic field, is a key part of it, and that magnetic field, once it hits the earth, if it's directed in the opposite way, if it's directed from north to south instead of south to north, it can produce reconnections in the earth's magnetic field that ultimately lead to energetic particles, electrons and protons, streaming back along the earth's magnetic field line into the atmosphere and producing the aurora.flatow: wow, that's terrific. doug, did you want to jump in there?biesecker: well, i was going to say in addition to the aurora, when the coronal mass ejection slams into the earth's magnetic field, that magnetic field that does protect us from the radiation storm, that changing magnetic field causes problems for customers.that's why the space weather prediction center is monitoring the sun hours a day to provide forecasts and get out those official watches, warnings and alerts to customers, because when that coronal mass ejection hits the earth, currents are being induced into the power grid.so the power system operators, with as little as minutes of warning, can protect their systems by making sure they have sufficient capacity to handle the extra currents, to have people in place to turn off a transformer if it starts to overhead. so it's something industry can respond to. they just need to have the watches, warnings and alerts to make sure they're able to.flatow: now, this one, if i heard you correctly, started less than an hour ago, and...biesecker: that's right, and...flatow: and so you weren't really able to get out - your prediction is at what stage, compared to, let's say, weather forecasting? what stage are you at at predicting?biesecker: well, i think the canonical thing people use is we're about to years behind weather forecasting. there are certain things where we're much better than that. with a coronal mass ejection we can observe them back at the sun, and then we can predict with in fact a numerical model that we introduced on the weather service supercomputer just a couple of months ago, we can use that to predict when this coronal mass ejection would arrive at earth.and the storm that erupted on sunday, january , erupting at : p.m. eastern time, slammed into the earth at : a.m. tuesday, within an hour of when it was predicted.flatow: and the one that's predicted less than - it started an hour ago, when is that going to slam into the earth?biesecker: well, that's - the early indications are that, in fact, it won't. because the active region has rotated away from an unfavorable position, that coronal mass ejection is going to fly harmlessly off into space, maybe hitting a science satellite or two on the way.flatow: i think a lot of people don't realize that the sun actually rotates.biesecker: yeah, the sun...flatow: it spins on its own axis, yeah.biesecker: every days on average, and because of that rotation - and i'm going to give dave the opportunity to jump in here and talk about why that's significant - lots of very - that's one of the reasons why the sun is so interesting, and we have a solar cycle.hathaway: yeah, part of it is that it - because it's a ball of gas, it doesn't have to rotate like a solid ball. in fact, it doesn't. at the equator, it rotates once in about days. if you get near the poles, it takes about days. and so that produces a sheering motion that things get stretched out and wrapped around the sun because of it, things like magnetic fields in particular, and that's in fact a key part of how the magnetic fields are generated and maintained within the sun, is - this is what we call differential rotation, the fact that the equator is rotating faster than the poles.there's a sheer layer near the surface that as you start at the surface and move inward, it - the rotation speeds up, then stays constant through, you know, , miles or so and then changes again at a layer about a quarter of the way into the sun.so that rotation, in fact, is key to producing the magnetic fields.flatow: ---. let's go to virginia in flint, michigan. hi, virginia.virginia: hi.flatow: hi there.virginia: fascinating stuff. we've had really warm weather here in michigan. is this going to impact weather patterns, like, are we going to have a really hot summer now? or another question is, is this going to melt the solar - excuse me - melt the icepacks and ozone and all that kind of stuff? i don't know if i've missed some of the answers already. but i'd be interested in how much it's going to melt, you know, the ice that's already melting so fast.flatow: ok, virginia, thanks for calling. we'll see what we can do.virginia: thank you.flatow: uh-huh.david hathaway: yeah. those are great questions. the sun does influence climate to some respect, but probably not weather as far as the day-to-day, that even though the sun got times brighter in x-rays, it hardly got brighter at all when you add up all the energy that the sun puts out and the earth receives. that's a tiny amount, even over the course of a complete sunspot cycle, when you go from no sunspots to, you know, sunspots on the sun and all of that activity; the sun's only about a th of percent, one part in , brighter. and so it's a small change. it has - again, in the long run has a bit of an effect on climate but day-to-day weather probably not.flatow: here's some questions, a few questions, different questions basically the same theme coming from the internet, and people want to know how this would affect - a flare like this might affect people in space, either the space station or people - astronauts on their way to mars or maybe on the moon, things like that.biesecker: sure. well, there certainly can be impacts. the astronauts on the international space station right now have to be concerned, but in general do they need to be concerned from the activity that's happening right now? not really. their action - they would react at very, very large levels of radiation. there's a certain risk that they're willing to accept, a few extra - or a slightly higher risk of cancer as they age. but the systems that they're using can be impacted by a radiation storm.so you know, with the shuttle, for example, the robot arm couldn't be used when a radiation storm exceeded a certain level. so there are certain impacts they do have to be aware of.flatow: tell us about this huge solar storm of - the storm of , doug.biesecker: well, was - it's kind of our perfect storm in solar physics. so the day was thursday, september , and sir richard carrington was in his house, at his observatory, watching the sun like he did every day, and he projected this image of the sun with his telescope till it was about inches across. and each day he would draw the sunspots. and this particular day he'd finished drawing the sunspots and he was just about to start measuring the locations on the sun when all of a sudden two bright lights appeared in the middle of one of these magnetic regions he'd measured.and he'd never seen this before. and he thought, oh, there's something wrong with my equipment, and he checked it out and quickly realized, no, it's not my equipment. and the careful observer that he is, he wrote down the time, : a.m. he was so shocked by this, he ran off to find somebody to help verify what he was seeing. he couldn't find anybody, came back, and it was already fading. it lasted all of five minutes. by : a.m., it was done.flatow: let me just interrupt to say this is science friday from npr. talking with doug biesecker, spinning a yarn about the solar flare of . keep going.biesecker: so now he knew something special had happened. and what makes this really remarkable is at a magnetic observatory, again, when you shake the earth's magnetic field, you know, if you and i had a compass, you know, it would point to solar north. but if you made a compass that was sensitive enough, you would be able to see that that magnetic field was shaking during one of these geomagnetic storms. and in fact, at : a.m. on september nd at the magnetic observatory at kew garden, there was a great magnetic storm.and carrington said, you know, a swallow doesn't make a summer, but there seems to be a connection here. so in just hours after he saw a flare on the sun, we had a huge, in fact the largest ever recorded, magnetic storm on the surface of the earth. it was so strong, every magnetic observatory in the world saturated, except for one that we know in india, and all measurements of that storm are now based on that one. impacts...flatow: and what did - yeah. what did it...biesecker: right.flatow: telegraphs and things like that?biesecker: right. so the technology of the day was telegraphs. so that's really where most of the impacts were. you know, in pittsburgh the telegraph machines got so hot, the operators couldn't touch them. in philadelphia, a telegraph operator received a shock from his equipment. in boston, there was a flame of fire. you know, in telegraph stations up and down the east coast the wood got scorched, paper burned. what did the average person see? well, aurora. in indianapolis the aurora was so bright and so strong, you didn't have to look north to see the aurora.you could look at your southern horizon and still see the aurora. in jamaica, it was described as like the light of a fire. it's believed that - well, in fact, it's been recorded that sailors saw it just degrees north of the equator and that if weather conditions had been favorable it would have been seen even at the equator. so the entire globe was able to see the aurora on september , .flatow: wow. do we know why that happened in such a spectacular fashion? what...biesecker: well, this particular event was really just the extreme of exactly what happened just this past sunday. associated with that solar flare was one of these coronal mass ejections. the speed of the coronal mass ejection doesn't tell you exactly how strong the storm will be. that - for that you need to know the magnetic field in the cme, but it's a pretty good indicator. and that transit of hours is the fastest ever recorded. and the impulse, you know, the amount of energy that got dumped into the earth's magnetic field was just incredible.flatow: do we have a number you can put on even a solar flare that just happened this week, how big explosion goes on?biesecker: off the - no. i don't have a number.flatow: dave, you got it?hathaway: yeah.biesecker: yeah.hathaway: the typical flare, if you look at the radiant energy from it, is the equivalent of a million megatons of tnt. so that's the energy equivalent of million hiroshima bombs.flatow: wow. all right. we're going to let that sink in for a little bit, take a break. we'll come back more and talk with doug biesecker and david hathaway about the sun and solar events. our number, ---. you can tweet us, scifri. stay with us. we'll be right back.(soundbite of music)flatow: this is science friday from npr. i'm ira flatow. we're talking about solar flares and the sun with david hathaway of nasa's marshall space flight center in huntsville, and doug biesecker of noaa's space weather prediction center in boulder. and we're going to talk a little - a few more minutes, because i want to recap. if you've just tuned in, there is a big solar flare happening right now in the sun, and maybe we can recap it. david, you want to take a shot at it? or doug? who would like to tell us what's going on there now?hathaway: doug is probably better at that. he's on top of it.flatow: ok. doug, what...biesecker: sure.flatow: bring us up to date.biesecker: right. well, i was on top of it until i walked into the studio, but what we had on a scale of one to five, we measure space weather, and the solar flare we had last sunday we measured at two on our solar flare scale, or an r. the flare we just had is even larger, at the r level. within minutes of that solar flare erupting, we started to see radiation particles at very high energies that are starting to hit the earth. they - the space weather prediction center, in our role, of course, put out a warning as soon as the flare began and in fact put out warnings for the radiation storm before the particles even began to arrive.flatow: and that happened today?biesecker: so that's happening right now. so the flare itself is probably practically over.hathaway: yeah.biesecker: the radiation storm will continue. it's hard for me to estimate without having seen the data recently how long that will continue. but what that would cause, you know, potential impacts to that - when the radiation levels reach sufficient levels, those same particles that david talked about coming down and hitting the polar regions, causing the aurora, that also causes the high frequency communications outages in the polar regions. and so any airplane flying over there loses their high-frequency radio.the problem there is they can't see those satellite - communication satellites sitting over the equator, so in fact they have absolutely no way to communicate if they're in the polar regions during one of these storms, which is why it's important that they get the information as quickly as possible, because if they have to divert one of those routes, it's not very cost effective.flatow: david, you want to add anything?hathaway: no. it's just - i wanted to mention, i am in my office so i can see the data, and the x-rays are well on their way going down, but the energetic particles, protons in particular, are rising rapidly.flatow: reaching us on earth?hathaway: yes. yeah. yeah. these are being measured as we speak at...biesecker: right.hathaway: ...satellites and geosynchronous orbit.flatow: and how many - how many watchdog satellites do we have out there?biesecker: well, for - well, noaa, those same weather satellites that are taking pictures of the hurricanes...flatow: right.biesecker: ...we have space weather sensors on those. and in fact the flare and the radiation storm are being measured with instruments on those same weather satellites. but we do leverage assets from nasa, for example; the coronal mass ejection that's associated with this flare, we know it's headed nowhere towards earth because we've got images of the solar atmosphere from that - from a nasa satellite that show us that that's what's happening. and we also use those data to help forecast when those coronal mass ejections will hit the earth.flatow: we'll be watching over the next hours, and people will, i guess, listen to science friday will know about it, because this word is coming out, happened within, oh, just a little bit over an hour ago. and thank you, gentlemen, for taking time to alert us.hathaway: thank you, ira, for having us on.flatow: you're welcome. david hathaway is solar astronomer at nasa's marshall space flight center in huntsville, alabama. and doug, thank you. doug biesecker is physicist at noaa's space weather prediction center in boulder, colorado.biesecker: thank you.flatow: you're welcome. copyright npr. all rights reserved. visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information. npr transcripts are created on a rush deadline by an npr contractor. this text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. accuracy and availability may vary. the authoritative record of nprs programming is the audio record. this photo provided by nasa, taken by the solar dynamics observatory, shows a solar flare, the bright flash in the center of the image on oct. , . solar dynamics observatorynasaap hide caption toggle caption solar dynamics observatorynasaap cape canaveral, fla. a severe solar storm is headed to earth that could stress power grids even more as the u.s. deals with major back-to-back hurricanes, space weather forecasters said wednesday. the national oceanic and atmospheric administration issued a severe geomagnetic storm watch for thursday into friday after an outburst from the sun was detected earlier this week. such a storm could temporarily disrupt power and radio signals. noaa has notified operators of power plants and orbiting spacecraft to take precautions. it also alerted the federal emergency management agency about possible power disruptions, as the organization copes with the devastating aftermath of hurricane helene and gears up for hurricane milton barreling across the gulf of mexico toward florida. sponsor message forecasters do not expect the latest solar storm to surpass the one that slammed earth in may, the strongest in more than two decades. but they won't know for sure until it's just million miles (. million kilometers) away, where spacecraft can measure it. space the huge solar storm is keeping power grid and satellite operators on edge florida is far enough south to avoid any power disruptions from the solar surge unless it gets a lot bigger, said scientist rob steenburgh of noaas space weather prediction center. that adds a little bit more to the comfort level, steenburgh said. "why we're here is to let them know so that they can prepare." experts are more concerned about potential effects to the power grids in areas slammed by hurricane helene two weeks ago, said noaa space weather forecaster shawn dahl. the storm also may trigger northern lights as far south in the u.s. as the lower midwest and northern california, though exact locations and times are uncertain, according to noaa. skygazers are reminded to point their smartphones upward for photos; the devices often can capture auroras that human eyes cannot. may's solar storm produced dazzling auroras across the northern hemisphere and resulted in no major disruptions. the sun is near the peak of its current -year cycle, sparking all the recent solar activity. a huge solar flare, the largest since , has been spotted erupting from the suns surface.solar flares are made up of electromagnetic radiation that travel from the sun at the speed of light and can reach earth in about eight minutes.they can disrupt some radio communications and satellites but most of us are unlikely to see those effects.there is also a chance that northern latitudes could see the northern lights this weekend as two geomagnetic storms are predicted to hit earth.solar flares do not cause the northern lights. they are caused by a phenomenon called coronal mass ejections (cmes) that erupt from an active sun spot.combined with flares, they can create solar storms that interact with earth's magnetic field or magnetosphere.the cmes spew out plasma and magnetic field, and up to billions of tons of material, that can hit earth. as our magnetosphere repels the storm, it creates the aurora.there is the potential for a coronal mass ejection to arrive at earth late on friday or early on saturday, which could lead to visible aurora for scotland, northern ireland and parts of northern england, said met office space weather manager krista hammond.a second cme is likely to hit earth on saturday and sunday, associated with the solar flare which is rated x.that means enhanced auroral visibility is possible further south across central england and similar latitudes, though cloud and rain could hamper viewing potential for some, says krista hammond.in the us, aurora might be seen in the northern states, and from the mid-west to oregon, according to noaas space weather prediction centre.the x solar flare emitted is the largest categorised by nasa. the smallest is b, followed by c, m, and x. the scale ranks from to , so x is the most powerful in nasa's ranking.the sun is approaching something called solar maximum which is when it is most active in an -year cycle.as the sun continues in this active phase, earth is more likely to be hit by strong geomagnetic storms, meaning there is higher chance of seeing the aurora borealis for the next few months.but scientists only know if solar maximum has happened six months after the event, because they use six months of data analysing the intensity and frequency of sun spots.current predictions suggest we could reach solar maximum at the end of or early .bbc weather presenter simon king says the uk weather does not look good for people hoping to spot the aurora this weekend.it would just be the far north-east of scotland getting the odd break in the cloud for a short time," he says.if activity turns out to be a bit stronger, the best of the clear skies on friday night will be more towards central and south england.he says clouds may hamper viewings on saturday night despite the evening starting with a lot of clear skies.copyright bbc. all rights reserved. the bbc is not responsible for the content of external sites. read about our approach to external linking. after years of relative somnolence, the sun is beginning to stir. by the time its fully awake in about months, the team at nasas goddard space flight center in greenbelt, maryland, who are charged with researching and tracking solar activity, will have at their disposal a greatly enhanced forecasting capability. goddards space weather laboratory recently received support under nasas space technology program game-changing program to implement ensemble forecasting, a computer technique already used by meteorologists to track potential paths and impacts of hurricanes and other severe weather events. instead of analyzing one set of solar-storm conditions, as is the case now, goddard forecasters will be able to simultaneously produce as many as computerized forecasts by calculating multiple possible conditions or, in the parlance of heliophysicists, parameters. just as important, they will be able to do this quickly and use the information to provide alerts of space weather storms that could potentially be harmful to astronauts and nasa spacecraft. space weather alerts are available now, but we want to make them better, said michael hesse from goddards space weather laboratory. ensemble forecasting will provide a distribution of arrival times, which will improve the reliability of forecasts. this is important. society is relying more so than ever on space. communications, navigation, electrical-power generation all are all susceptible to space weather. once its implemented, there will be nothing like this in the world. no one has done ensemble forecasting for space weather. the state-of-the-art capability, which hesses group is implementing now and expects to complete within three years, couldnt come too soon, either. sun growing restlesssince the sun reached its solar minimum in the period when the number of sunspots is lowest it has begun to awaken from its slumber. on august , the sun unleashed a near x-class solar flare that erupted near an earth-facing sunspot. although flares dont always produce coronal mass ejections (cmes) gigantic bubbles of charged particles that can carry up to billion tons of matter and accelerate to several million miles per hour as they erupt from the suns atmosphere and stream through interplanetary space this one did. the cme overtook two previous cmes all occurring within hours and combined into a triple threat. luckily for people on earth, the cmes produced only a moderate geomagnetic storm when solar particles streamed down the field lines toward earths poles and collided with atoms of nitrogen and oxygen in the atmosphere. even so, it was the strongest storm in many years, said antti pulkkinen, one of the laboratorys chief forecasters. however, the repercussions could be far worse in the future. as part of its -year cycle, the sun is entering solar maximum, the period of greatest activity. it is expected to peak in . during this time, more powerful cmes, often associated with m- and x-class flare events, become more numerous and can affect any planet or spacecraft in its path. in the past, solar storms have disrupted power grids on earth and damaged instrumentation on satellites. they also can be harmful to astronauts if they are not warned to take protective cover. no one knows exactly what the sun will do, pulkkinen said. we cant even tell in a week, let alone a year or two, what the sun will do. all we know is that the sun will be more active. given the expected uptick in activity, hesse, pulkkinen, and yihua zheng, another chief forecaster, were anxious to enhance their forecasting acumen. they partnered with the space radiation analysis group at nasas johnson space center in houston, texas, which is responsible for ensuring that astronauts exposure to deadly radiation remains below established safety levels, and won nasa funding to develop the integrated advanced alertwarning systems for solar proton events. weaknesses in current systemensemble forecasting holds the key to an enhanced alert system,hesse said. we agreed that this was the way to go. currently, the laboratory is running one cme model calculating one set of parameters at a time. the parameters are derived from near real-time data gathered by nasas solar dynamics observatory, the solar terrestrial relations observatory, and the solar and heliospheric observatory, among others. but since all of these are scientific research missions, we have no guarantee of a continuous real-time data stream, zheng said. furthermore, imperfections exist in the data. these imperfections grow over time, leading to forecasts that dont agree with the evolution of actual conditions. for nasa, the air force, and other organizations that use goddards forecasts to decide whether steps are needed to protect space assets and astronauts, uncertainty is as unwelcome as the storm itself. ensemble forecasting, however, overcomes the weaknesses by allowing forecasters to tweak the conditions. generating different parameters is easy just varying a little bit of all parameters involved in characterizing a cme, such as its speed, propagation direction, and angular extent, zheng said. in essence, the multiple forecasts provide information on the different ways the cme can evolve over the next few hours. well be able to characterize the uncertainties in our forecasts, which is almost as important as the forecast itself,pulkkinen said. the team has already installed new computer systems to run the varying calculations and hopes to develop the ability to generate more specialized forecasts. we recognize there is a huge gap in our current capability, pulkkinen said. we certainly dont want to miss the solar maximum with this capability. were really pushing the envelope to have it done. when we do, well be the first in the world to have it. when this forecasting technique is verified and validated by nasas space weather laboratory, the capability will be made available to noaas space weather prediction center, which is responsible for issuing national space weather alerts. nasas goal to understand and track space weather activity will enable a greatly enhanced forecasting capability for u.s. interests. on feb. , , spacex launched satellites as part of elon musks starlink internet project, most of which burned up in the atmosphere days later. the cause of this more than us million failure was a geomagnetic storm caused by the sun. geomagnetic storms occur when space weather hits and interacts with the earth. space weather is caused by fluctuations within the sun that blast electrons, protons and other particles into space. i study the hazards space weather poses to space-based assets and how scientists can improve the models and prediction of space weather to protect against these hazards. when space weather reaches earth, it triggers many complicated processes that can cause a lot of trouble for anything in orbit. and engineers like me are working to better understand these risks and defend satellites against them. the sun occasionally blasts huge amounts of particles into space during active events like solar flares and coronal mass ejections. what causes space weather? the sun is always releasing a steady amount of charged particles into space. this is called the solar wind. solar wind also carries with it the solar magnetic field. sometimes, localized fluctuations on the sun will hurl unusually strong bursts of particles in a particular direction. if earth happens to be in the path of the enhanced solar wind generated by one of these events and gets hit, you get a geomagnetic storm. the two most common causes of geomagnetic storms are coronal mass ejections explosions of plasma from the surface of the sun and solar wind that escapes through coronal holes spots of low density in the suns outer atmosphere. the speed at which the ejected plasma or solar wind arrives at earth is an important factor the faster the speed, the stronger the geomagnetic storm. normally, solar wind travels at roughly , mph (. million kph). but strong solar events can release winds up to five times as fast. the strongest geomagnetic storm on record was caused by a coronal mass ejection in september . when the mass of particles hit earth, they caused electrical surges in telegraph lines that shocked operators and, in some extreme cases, actually set telegraph instruments on fire. research suggests that if a geomagnetic storm of this magnitude hit earth today, it would cause roughly trillion in damage.a magnetic shield emissions from the sun, including the solar wind, would be incredibly dangerous to any life form unlucky enough to be directly exposed to them. thankfully, earths magnetic field does a lot to protect humanity. the first thing solar wind hits as it approaches earth is the magnetosphere. this region surrounding the earths atmosphere is filled with plasma made of electrons and ions. its dominated by the planets strong magnetic field. when solar wind hits the magnetosphere, it transfers mass, energy and momentum into this layer. the magnetosphere can absorb most of the energy from the everyday level of solar wind. but during strong storms, it can get overloaded and transfer excess energy to the upper layers of earths atmosphere near the poles. this redirection of energy to the poles is what results in fantastic aurora events, but it also causes changes in the upper atmosphere that can harm space assets.dangers to whats in orbit there a few different ways geomagnetic storms threaten orbiting satellites that serve people on the ground daily. when the atmosphere absorbs energy from magnetic storms, it heats up and expands upward. this expansion significantly increases the density of the thermosphere, the layer of the atmosphere that extends from about miles ( kilometers) to roughly miles (, km) above the surface of the earth. higher density means more drag, which can be a problem for satellites.starlink satellites are released in batches, and were destroyed in early february because of a geomagnetic storm. spacex via wikimediacommons this situation is exactly what led to the demise of the the spacex starlink satellites in february. starlink satellites are dropped off by falcon rockets into a low-altitude orbit, typically somewhere between and miles ( and km) above the earths surface. the satellites then use onboard engines to slowly overcome the force of drag and raise themselves to their final altitude of approximately miles ( km). the latest batch of starlink satellites encountered a geomagnetic storm while still in very low-earth orbit. their engines could not overcome the significantly increased drag, and the satellites began slowly falling toward earth and eventually burned up in the atmosphere. drag is just one hazard that space weather poses to space-based assets. the significant increase in high-energy electrons within the magnetosphere during strong geomagnetic storms means more electrons will penetrate the shielding on a spacecraft and accumulate within its electronics. this buildup of electrons can discharge in what is basically a small lightning strike and damage electronics. penetrating radiation or charged particles in the magnetosphere even during mild geomagnetic storms can also alter the output signal from electronic devices. this phenomenon can cause errors in any part of a spacecrafts electronics system, and if the error occurs in something critical, the entire satellite can fail. small errors are common and usually fixable, but total failures, though rare, do happen. finally, geomagnetic storms can disrupt the ability of satellites to communicate with earth using radio waves. many communications technologies, like gps, for example, rely on radio waves. the atmosphere always distorts radio waves by some amount , so engineers correct for this distortion when building communication systems. but during geomagnetic storms, changes in the ionosphere the charged equivalent of the thermosphere that spans roughly the same altitude range will change how radio waves travel through it. the calibrations in place for a quiet atmosphere become wrong during geomagnetic storms. this, for example, makes it difficult to lock onto gps signals and can throw off the positioning by a few meters. for many industries aviation, maritime, robotics, transportation, farming, military and others gps positioning errors of a few meters are simply not tenable. autonomous driving systems will require accurate positioning as well. how to protect against space weather satellites are critically important for much of the modern world to function, and protecting space assets from space weather is an important area of research. some of the risks can be minimized by shielding electronics from radiation or developing materials that are more resistant to radiation. but there is only so much shielding that can be done in the face of a powerful geomagnetic storm. the ability to accurately forecast storms would make it possible to preemptively safeguard satellites and other assets to a certain extent by shutting down sensitive electronics or reorienting the satellites to be better protected. but while the modeling and forecasting of geomagnetic storms has significantly improved over the past few years, the projections are often wrong. the national oceanic and atmospheric administration had warned that, following a coronal mass ejection, a geomagnetic storm was likely to occur the day before or the day of the february starlink launch. the mission went ahead anyway. the sun is like a child that often throws tantrums. its essential for life to go on, but its ever-changing disposition make things challenging. piyush mehta, assistant professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering, west virginia university this article is republished from the conversation under a creative commons license. read the original article. january , a nasa-funded study describes how extreme solar eruptions could have severe consequences for communications, power grids, and other technology on earth. the national academy of sciences in washington conducted the study. the resulting report provides some of the first clear economic data that effectively quantifies todays risk of extreme conditions in space driven by magnetic activity on the sun and disturbances in the near-earth environment. instances of extreme space weather are rare and are categorized with other natural hazards that have a low frequency but high consequences. obviously, the sun is earths life blood, said richard fisher, director of the heliophysics division at nasa headquarters in washington. to mitigate possible public safety issues, it is vital that we better understand extreme space weather events caused by the suns activity. besides emitting a continuous stream of plasma called the solar wind, the sun periodically releases billions of tons of matter called coronal mass ejections. these immense clouds of material, when directed toward earth, can cause large magnetic storms in the magnetosphere and upper atmosphere. such space weather can affect the performance and reliability of space-borne and ground-based technological systems. space weather can produce solar storm electromagnetic fields that induce extreme currents in wires, disrupting power lines, causing widespread blackouts, and affecting communication cables that support the internet. severe space weather also produces solar energetic particles and the dislocation of earths radiation belts that can damage satellites used for commercial communications, global positioning, and weather forecasting. space weather has caused problems with new technology since the invention of the telegraph in the th century. a catastrophic failure of commercial and government infrastructure in space and on the ground can be mitigated through raising public awareness, improving vulnerable infrastructure, and developing advanced forecasting capabilities. without preventive actions or plans, the trend of increased dependency on modern space-weather sensitive assets could make society more vulnerable in the future. nasa requested the study to assess the potential damage from significant space weather during the next years. national and international experts from industry, government, and academia participated in the study. the report documents the possibility of a space weather event that has societal effects and causes damage similar to natural disasters on earth. from a public policy perspective, it is quite significant that we have begun the extremely challenging task of assessing space-weather impacts in a quantitative way, said daniel baker, professor and director of the laboratory for atmospheric and space physics at the university of colorado in boulder. whether it is terrestrial catastrophes or extreme space weather incidents, the results can be devastating to modern societies that depend in a myriad of ways on advanced technological systems, said baker. we were delighted that nasa helped support bringing together dozens of world experts from industry and government to share their experiences and begin planning of improved public policy strategies. the sun is currently near the minimum of its -year activity cycle. it is expected that solar storms will increase in frequency and intensity toward the next solar maximum, expected to occur around . buckle up: an unusual amount of solar activity this week could disrupt some of the most important technologies society relies on.on thursday, the us government issued its first severe geomagnetic storm watch in nearly years, advising the public of at least five earth-directed coronal mass ejections as well as sunspots covering an area times wider than the earth itself. a severe geomagnetic storm, or g, is the second-highest grade in the us governments classification system.radiation from this activity began to hit the earths magnetic field on friday and will last through the weekend, said the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa). on friday evening, noaa upgraded the storm to g or extreme, marking the first such event since october .noaas warning of extreme space weather suggests the storm could trigger numerous effects for life on earth, possibly affecting the power grid as well as satellite and high frequency radio communications. heres what that means for technology users.the solar activity noaas talking about involves the release of energy from the sun that travels through space and eventually reaches earth.when that radiation hits the magnetic sphere surrounding the planet, it causes fluctuations in the ionosphere, a layer of the upper atmosphere.those changes can directly affect satellites and other spacecraft in orbit, altering their orientation or potentially knocking out their electronics.moreover, the changes to the ionosphere can block or degrade radio transmissions trying to pass through the atmosphere to reach satellites. and they can also prevent radio transmissions from successfully bouncing off the ionosphere which some radio operators normally do to increase the range of their signals.since gps satellites depend on signals penetrating the ionosphere, the geomagnetic disturbance scientists are expecting could affect that critical technology used by planes, ocean-going vessels, and in the agriculture and oil and gas industries. and it could affect shortwave radio transmissions used by ships and aircraft, emergency management agencies, the military and even ham radio operators, all of whom rely on the high frequency radio airwaves that noaa says could be scattered by the storm.geomagnetic storms can impact infrastructure in near-earth orbit and on earths surface, potentially disrupting communications, the electric power grid, navigation, radio and satellite operations, noaas space weather prediction center said in a release. swpc has notified the operators of these systems so they can take protective action.consumer wireless networks rely on different radio frequencies than the high frequency band, so it appears unlikely that the storm will directly affect cellular service. the gps features on your phone also typically use a mix of pure gps and cellular tower-based location tracking, so even if gps signals are disrupted, phone users may still be able to maintain a rough location fix.so long as the underlying electrical infrastructure that supports wireless networks remains unaffected, even an extreme space weather event should result in minimal direct impact to public safety line of-sight radio and commercial cellular services and no first-order impact to consumer electronic devices, according to researchers summarizing the findings of a study of extreme space weather conducted by noaa and the federal emergency management agency.the cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency outlined a similar report in a presentation on space weather, finding that line-of-sight radio transmissions are generally not affected by space weather except in specific situations. the presentation did note some risks for copper cables and telephone lines based on land.in a slightly different scenario in february, noaa noted two major solar flares. but despite widely reported cellular network outages around the same time, the agency said, it was highly unlikely that the flares played a role in those blackouts.on friday, noaa officials reiterated that the impact to cell phones this weekend should be slim to none, unless there are broad disruptions to the power grid.weve not seen any evidence in the past that a space weather storm could impact that now, brent gordon, chief of the space weather services branch for swpc, told reporters on a conference call. if power is not available for those, then yes, certainly, the secondary impacts from that would be great.severe space weather can jeopardize power grids, according to noaa, whose alert this week said to expect possible widespread voltage control problems and that some protective systems may mistakenly trip out key assets from the power grid.in , a space weather event led to a massive blackout in quebec, canada for more than nine hours after geomagnetic fluctuations damaged transformers and other important equipment.in october, an extreme geomagnetic storm stronger than the one predicted for this weekend led to power outages in sweden and damaged power transformers in south africa, the swpc said.the largest known geomagnetic storm in history, known as the carrington event of , caused telegraph stations to spark and catch fire.a blackout of the electrical grid could have cascading effects for communications and other technologies, including cellphones. cellular towers might lose power, as could the data centers that host websites and their information.still, many wireless carriers providers already maintain backup power generators and mobile cellular towers that they can deploy in the event of a natural disaster or other major incident. redundancy and resiliency are watchwords of all critical infrastructure providers, so even if the power grid did fail, consumers might have to worry more about how to keep their phones charged rather than whether they could stay online.as if to underscore that point, the us governments advice to the public on how to prepare for a space weather event largely resembles the same steps youd take in response to an extended power outage.for example, the government recommends keeping extra batteries or a hand-powered charger available for small electronic devices. officials say you may want to disconnect electric appliances to protect them from power surges and limit your electricity usage during a solar weather event. you may also want to keep your cars gas tank at least half-full so that you do not need to visit a gas station (which needs electricity to operate the pumps).cnns ashley strickland contributed to this report. forecasters will soon be able to see real-time mapping of lightning activity on earth and keep a closer eye on solar storms unleashed by the sun thanks to a new weather satellite.together, nasa and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration launched goes-u, or the geostationary operational environmental satellite u mission, on tuesday.the weather satellite lifted off aboard a spacex falcon heavy rocket from kennedy space center in florida at : p.m. et. the launch streamed live on nasas website. weather conditions in florida were favorable for a launch at the beginning of the launch window.goes-u is the fourth, final satellite in the geostationary operational environmental satellites r series, the western hemispheres most sophisticated weather-observing and environmental-monitoring system, according to noaa.the goes-r series of satellites has been a game changer for us, said ken graham, director of noaas national weather service, during a monday news conference. since the first launch of the series in , the latest generation of goes has enabled new and improved forecasts and warnings services to help save lives and protect property.once goes-u reaches a geostationary orbit, or a circular orbit above earths equator, the satellite will be renamed goes-, or goes east. the satellite will replace goes-, the former goes east satellite launched in , and work in tandem with goes-, also called goes west. meanwhile, the goes- satellite will essentially become an on-orbit backup for the system in case one of the satellites goes down.together, the goes- and goes- satellites will collect atmospheric, solar, climatic and ocean data and cover more than half the globe from the west coast of africa to new zealand.what sets goes-u apart from other satellites is that its carrying a new capability to keep an eye on space weather.as the sun nears solar maximum the peak in its -year cycle, expected this year it becomes more active. researchers have observed increasingly intense solar flares and coronal mass ejections erupting from the suns surface.coronal mass ejections are large clouds of ionized gas called plasma and magnetic fields that release from the suns outer atmosphere.when these outbursts are directed at earth, they can cause geomagnetic storms, or major disturbances of earths magnetic field. with these events, there is always a chance that communications, the electric power grid, navigation, and radio and satellite operations will be affected.the most intense solar storm to impact earth in years occurred on may , but fortunately it only caused auroras to shine over states that never see the northern lights.increased solar activity causes auroras that dance around earths poles, known as the northern lights, or aurora borealis, and southern lights, or aurora australis. when the energized particles from coronal mass ejections reach earths magnetic field, they interact with gases in the atmosphere to create different colored lights in the sky.goes-u carries multiple instruments that will improve the detection of space weather hazards, including the compact coronagraph- that can detect solar flares and coronal mass ejections, as well as characterize the size, velocity, density and direction of these solar storms.the coronagraph will provide continuous observations of the solar corona, or the hot outer layer of the suns atmosphere, which is where space weather events originate, said elsayed talaat, director of noaas office of space weather observations.the instruments capabilities will allow noaas space weather prediction center to issue warnings and watches one to four days in advance and mark a new chapter in space weather observatoions, talaat said.the compact coronagraph- is the worlds first-ever operational satellite coronagraph to better monitor the sun, said steve volz, assistant administrator for noaas satellite and information service.this new instrument will deliver imagery of the suns corona to our forecasters at the space weather prediction center within minutes, and thats compared to the previous time it used to take, about eight hours, graham said. geomagnetic storms can impact our infrastructure here on earth by putting our power grid, communications, navigation systems, aviation and space-based assets at risk. having a better and faster observation will help us better alert our infrastructure providers and potential hazards so they can take action.from orbit, goes-u will monitor weather, climate and environmental hazards across north, central and south america, the caribbean, and the atlantic ocean to the west coast of africa.from its unique vantage point, goes-u will be able to spot tropical storms, send alerts to forecasters as the storms form in the atlantic ocean, and provide near real-time tracking and monitoring.the satellite carries a suite of science instruments, including imaging and mapping technology, that will enable it to capture valuable data on hurricanes, including upper-level wind speeds, specific features about the hurricanes eye and lightning activity, all of which can help forecasters better understand potential risks.goes-u will carry the first operational lightning mapper flown in geostationary orbit. as storms develop, they tend to show spikes in lightning activity. understanding how storms develop and intensify can help meteorologists to better predict whether storms will be capable of causing flash flooding, producing hail, damaging winds or spawning tornadoes.the lightning mapper will take pictures of the earth at a rate of times per second in order to track lightning like never before, sullivan said.the main camera on goes-u can zoom in to track dangerous weather and environmental conditions as often as every seconds, a capability that enables better warning systems, said pam sullivan, director of the goes-r program for noaa.forecasters can also use goes-us instruments to identify the risks of wildfires, including hot spots, intensity, smoke output and air quality impacts, and even data that can help trackers predict the motion of the fires. the satellite can also use its lightning mapper to determine which lightning strikes are the likeliest of igniting wildfires.other environmental hazards goes-u can track include real-time imagery of fog and low clouds that can impact air and sea travel, as well as detecting volcanic eruptions and the ash and sulfur dioxide belched out by volcanoes. goes-u will also be able to monitor atmospheric river events, or large sections of earths atmosphere that carry moisture from the equator to the poles, that are capable of causing flooding and mudslides.in addition to early warning of hurricane formation, goes-u can also collect climate data on earths oceans such as signs of marine heat waves and sea surface temperatures, which impact the marine food chain and can lead to mass coral bleaching events. space weather forecasts designed to keep the multi-billion-dollar satellite industry safe from hazards while in orbit fall short of what's needed and are prone to errors, according to space experts.a new study published by american geophysical union examined the shortfalls of space forecasts and scrutinized a february event where starlink satellites were destroyed during a prolonged geomagnetic storm.a geomagnetic storm can last for days and happens when there is a disruption of earth's magnetic field.in the debilitating spacex event, an analysis found the satellites experienced increased drag, which made it impossible for the high-tech machines to find orbit.the satellites fell harmlessly into earth's atmosphere, where the more than -pound objects burned up.geomagnetic storm causes destruction of new starlink satellitesthe national oceanic and atmospheric administration said spacex engineers had the latest space weather forecast, but it was simply not adequate to understand the potential impacts of the geomagnetic storm.noaa has used a -point scale to rank activity, but the study authors claim the current forecasts are insufficient."commercial satellite operators receive general forecasts, watch, warnings, and alerts through noaa's data and web services, but none are currently specifically focused on satellite drag at low-earth orbit. thus, it is critical for swpc to establish alerts and warnings for thermospheric density enhancement conditions. this information will certainly become essential when dealing with space traffic coordination in an increasingly crowded space environment during both geomagnetic quiet and perturbed conditions," study authors stated.a fix may be challenging as authors believe noaa needs increased observations and data to improve space weather forecast models.these are the categories that measure geomagnetic stormswith increased data, it is hoped that experts will be better able to predict arrival times and magnitudes of geomagnetic activity, producem more accurate forecasts and improve cooperation with satellite operators.noaa expects similar type events to what destroyed the starlink satellites to become more frequent as the sun's activity ramps up and reaches its solar maximum around .during a solar maximum, eruptions from the sun increase and emit powerful eruptions of energy into space.this uptick in activity can impact everything from space programs to communications and electronics on earth's surface.if the magnitude and arrival times are accurately predicted, complex space systems can be put in safe mode to better weather the impacts."a worst-case solar storm could have an economic impact similar to a category hurricane or a tsunami," dr. sten odenwald, an expert at nasa's goddard space flight center, previously stated.